---
layout: post
title: "Bachify: A curated Spotify playlist of all\* Bach pieces"
date: 2014-09-12 00:00:00 -0400
comments: true
categories: [music, bach, spotify]
---

We live in an amazing era. Anybody with a sufficient Internet connection, even
a wireless connection, can listen to nearly *any piece of music they want to*.

I dimly remember a TV commercial from the mid '90s, advertising a
telecommunications company by way of advertising the "Information
Superhighway". A weary traveler in a run-down bar in the desert asks the
bartender something like "What kind of music you got here?" The bartender
answers "Everything." The traveler asks for a particular recording of a
particular piece of classical music, and the bartender immediately puts it on.
It sounded ludicrous then. It's reality now.

The particular reason I mention this is, I've just spent about 8 months
listening to the complete works of J. S. Bach, and picking out good recordings
of all of them. This wasn't my intention at the start. At the start I just
wanted to discover more good Bach pieces, and put them into a nice deduplicated
playlist as I did so. But the funny thing is, once you listen to enough Bach,
something clicks, and *any* Bach piece has the potential to be really good.

I say "potential" because another thing I discovered is that the recording
*really* matters. For every beautiful, inspired perfomance, there are ten
performances that range from half-assed to offensive.

There are a few cases of
compositions by Bach where I think nobody has made the right recording yet. But
for most of the 1,075-ish pieces in this playlist, I was choosing from multiple
great options.

Spotify is the thing that made it possible. Spotify is also the thing that made
it hard, because their organization of classical music is *terrible*. When I
was halfway done, I even had the misfortune of upgrading to a version of
Spotify that dumbed down the search feature, so searching became much harder
until (months later) the Spotify help forums told me about an undocumented
feature to fix it.

Spotify needs music librarians. I'm not one, but I'll play one on
the Internet. After all, I've just listened to all\* his compositions, and I want
to share with you what I found.

## The playlists

Let's get to the point now. Here's the collection. It's broken into five
playlists to provide a bit of relief to your scrolling fingers. The fact that
every\* Bach piece is catalogued with a BWV number, and the BWV numbers are
approximately broken up by what style of work they are, is quite helpful here.
Let me describe them in broad strokes:

    **[BWV 1-249]**: Big choral works, including the cantatas and masses
    **[BWV 250-524]**: Chorales and songs. (To be honest, if you listen straight through this playlist in particular, you're gonna have a bad time.)
    **[BWV 525-770]**: Organ works
    **[BWV 772-994]**: Keyboard works
    **[BWV 995-1080]**: Works for orchestras and solo instruments
    **[BWV 1081-1128]**: Works discovered since 1950

If you're crying foul because there are tracks missing from the 1-249 playlist
-- that is, every one that's a real Bach piece is in there, but sometimes they
have a smaller number of movements -- let me explain my reasons and provide you
with an [unabridged BWV 1-249 playlist].

The movements I skipped were some of the particularly uninteresting
recitatives. It's my opinion that there's no reason to force yourself to listen
to many of the recitatives just because you're listening to cantatas. The
movements of a cantata definitely go together, but you shouldn't have to delay
your next transcendent listening experience just to listen to someone
speak-singing about God in German for a while. I think you'd include these
recitatives if you actually were performing the music in a church service, as
the cantatas originally were, but if you're just appreciating the music it'll
work better when some of the recitatives aren't there.

You may disagree with my choices, and that's why I included the unabridged
playlist as well.

## Searching for Bach

I'll restate that trying to find classical music on Spotify is a pretty bad
experience. There's just no consistency to how things are labeled. Classical
music doesn't fit in the hierarchy that every major music player has settled
on that attempts to describe every track by its "artist", "album", and "song",
and some ways to mitigate the problem don't exist on Spotify.

In classical music, "albums" are unpredictable and arbitrary. They're not
grouped by work, they're grouped by how much music you can fit on a CD. The
"artist" is sometimes the composer, but more often the performer, especially
when the performance is particularly good (look for the cello suites under
"Yo-Yo Ma", not "J. S. Bach").

...

## Picking the recordings

It seems that Bach, more than other composers, has motivated some performers to
plod through an uninspired performance just to get a recording out there.

The worst offenders are the compilation albums that shovel together generic
recordings for some utilitarian purpose, with names like "Bach for Studying",
"Bach To Train Your Brain", and worst of all "Smart Babies".

Even the ones that sound well-intentioned, such as "Fifty Essential Bach
Pieces", are not going to get you the right recordings. This may sound like a
hypocritical thing for me to say when presenting an enormous Bach compilation,
but the issue here is that the compilation albums didn't license the best
performances, just the ones that were most convenient to re-release. I can put
Glenn Gould on the playlist. They can't.

It's possible for even well-respected ensembles to succumb to blandness. John
Eliot Gardiner says a lot about this in his recently-published tome, *Music in
the Castle of Heaven* (which I've read about half of), presenting a narrative
where he personally saved Bach cantatas from terminal torpor. He rails against
the famous choir of King's College, Cambridge performing cantatas with precious
affectedness, aiming for a goal of "loveliness" instead of interestingness and
inspiration, which spurred Gardiner to start his own ensemble.

It sounds too grandiose to be true, but from recordings I came across on
Spotify, his story checks out. You can listen to King's College ruining
cantatas, then listen to the awesome recordings from the Bach Cantata
Pilgrimage that Gardiner directed, then listen to the much improved King's
College recordings that came after, such as their unparalleled Magnificat.

