---
layout: post
title: "Bachify: A curated Spotify playlist of all\* Bach pieces"
date: 2014-09-12 00:00:00 -0400
comments: true
categories: [music, bach, spotify]
---

We live in an amazing era. Anybody with a sufficient Internet connection, even
a wireless connection, can listen to nearly *any piece of music they want to*.

I dimly remember a TV commercial from the mid '90s, advertising a
telecommunications company by way of advertising the "Information
Superhighway". A weary traveler in a run-down bar in the desert asks the
bartender something like "What kind of music you got here?" The bartender
answers "Everything." The traveler asks for a particular recording of a
particular piece of classical music, and the bartender immediately puts it on.
It sounded ludicrous then. It's reality now.

The particular reason I mention this is, I've just spent about 8 months
listening to the complete works of J. S. Bach, and picking out good recordings
of all of them. This wasn't my intention at the start. At the start I just
wanted to discover more good Bach pieces, and put them into a nice deduplicated
playlist as I did so. But the funny thing is, once you listen to enough Bach,
something clicks, and *any* Bach piece has the potential to be really good.

I say "potential" because another thing I discovered is that the recording
*really* matters. For every beautiful, inspired perfomance, there are ten
performances that range from half-assed to offensive.

There are a few cases of
compositions by Bach where I think nobody has made the right recording yet. But
for most of the 1,075-ish pieces in this playlist, I was choosing from multiple
great options.

Spotify is the thing that made it possible. Spotify is also the thing that made
it hard, because their organization of classical music is so bad. When I was
halfway done, I even had the misfortune of upgrading to a version of Spotify
that dumbed down the search feature, so searching became much harder until,
months later, I learned an undocumented trick that fixes it from the Spotify
help forums. (More on this below.)

Spotify needs music librarians. I'm not one, but I'll play one on
the Internet. After all, I've just listened to all\* his compositions, and I want
to share with you what I found.

## The playlists

Let's get to the point now. Here's the collection. It's broken into five
playlists to provide a bit of relief to your scrolling fingers. The fact that
every\* Bach piece is catalogued with a BWV number, and the BWV numbers are
approximately broken up by what style of work they are, is quite helpful here.
Let me describe them in broad strokes:

    **[BWV 1-249]**: Big choral works, including the cantatas and masses
    **[BWV 250-524]**: Chorales and songs. (To be honest, if you listen straight through this playlist in particular, you're gonna have a bad time.)
    **[BWV 525-770]**: Organ works
    **[BWV 772-994]**: Keyboard works
    **[BWV 995-1080]**: Other instrumental works, including those for orchestras and solo instruments
    **[BWV 1081-1128]**: Works discovered since 1950

If you're crying foul because there are tracks missing from the 1-249 playlist
-- that is, every one that's a real Bach piece is in there, but sometimes they
have a smaller number of movements -- let me explain my reasons and provide you
with an [unabridged BWV 1-249 playlist].

The movements I skipped were some of the particularly uninteresting
recitatives. It's my opinion that there's no reason to force yourself to listen
to many of the recitatives just because you're listening to cantatas. The
movements of a cantata definitely go together, but you shouldn't have to delay
your next transcendent listening experience just to listen to someone
speak-singing about God in German for a while. I think you'd include these
recitatives if you actually were performing the music in a church service, as
the cantatas originally were, but if you're just appreciating the music it'll
work better when some of the recitatives aren't there.

You may disagree with my choices, and that's why I included the unabridged
playlist as well.

## Searching for Bach

I'll restate that trying to find classical music on Spotify is a pretty bad
experience overall. There's just no consistency to how things are labeled.
Classical music doesn't fit in the hierarchy that every major music player has
settled on that attempts to describe every track by its "artist", "album", and
"song", and some ways that other systems kind of mitigate the problem don't
exist on Spotify.

In classical music, "albums" are unpredictable and arbitrary. They're not
grouped by work, they're grouped by the whims of the label and by how much
music you can fit on a CD. The "artist" is sometimes the composer, but more
often the performer, especially when the performance is particularly good (look
for the cello suites under "Yo-Yo Ma", not "J. S. Bach").

ID3 tags and iTunes have a way to slightly mitigate the "artist" problem, by
adding "album artist" and "composer" fields. Spotify doesn't have these.

So it would almost sound like there's no way to search for Bach on Spotify
unless you already know what you're going to find. This is the case for many
composers. But in Bach's case, BWV numbers save the day.

Classical music labels have known for a long time that BWV numbers are the best
way to distinguish which Bach piece is which, so nearly every Bach recording
on Spotify includes the BWV number in its *track title*. To find all the 
recordings of the Canzona in D Minor, BWV 588, you can just type `"BWV 588"`
in quotes into the search box. Hooray!

No, just kidding. It used to be that way, but now if you search for `"BWV
588"`, Spotify will assume you made a typo. The "Most Relevant" hits will be
for the Goldberg Variations (BWV 988) and the "Little Fugue" in G Minor (BWV
578).  Somewhat lower on "Most Relevant" you'll find several recordings of BWV
588, particularly the mediocre ones like "Spooky Bach Halloween" by Joe Fox and
the Haunted Players.

Finally, at the bottom, you may find the "All Tracks" section, where most of
the good recordings are exiled for some reason. Or they may be in the other
section, interspersed with the wrong tracks and the right-but-mediocre ones.

Hope you like this organizational scheme, because the results are not sortable.
You can't group them by album or sort them by popularity anymore.

But there's a trick. Some brilliant user posted an incantation on the Spotify
help forums that gets back the old search behavior. You type this into the
search box:

    spotify:search:"BWV 588"


## Picking the recordings

It seems that Bach, more than other composers, has motivated some performers to
plod through an uninspired performance just to get a recording out there.

The worst offenders are the compilation albums that shovel together generic
recordings for some utilitarian purpose, with names like "Bach for Studying",
"Bach To Train Your Brain", the aforementioned "Spooky Bach Halloween", and
worst of all "Smart Babies".

Even the ones that sound well-intentioned, such as "Fifty Essential Bach
Pieces", are not going to get you the right recordings. That may sound like a
hypocritical thing for me to say when I'm presenting an enormous Bach
compilation. But the issue here is that the compilation albums didn't license
the best performances, just the ones that were most convenient to re-release. I
can put Glenn Gould on the playlist. They can't.

It's possible for even well-respected ensembles to succumb to blandness. John
Eliot Gardiner says a lot about this in his recently-published tome, *Music in
the Castle of Heaven* (which I've read about half of), presenting a narrative
where he personally saved Bach cantatas from terminal torpor. He rails against
the famous choir of King's College, Cambridge performing cantatas with precious
affectedness, aiming for a goal of "loveliness" instead of interestingness and
inspiration, which spurred Gardiner to start his own ensemble.

It sounds too grandiose to be true, but from recordings I came across on
Spotify, his story checks out. King's College has many old (you can tell
they're old because the Spotify year says "2014") recordings on Spotify that
you could charitably describe as "lovely", if you didn't describe them as
"boring" or "badly recorded".

Gardiner's series of recordings, the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage (not that you can
search for that name on Spotify), brings hundreds of cantatas to life in a way
that most earlier recordings don't. He completes for this claim with a few
others, particularly Masaaki Suzuki with Bach Collegium Japan, and sometimes
Ton Koopman and Phillippe Herreweghe. 

And if I'm not just imagining the cause and effect, Gardiner's project seems to
have prodded King's College into making their own great recordings recently,
including their unparalleled Magnificat.

